Appendix A: Code description

This appendix provides a high level overview of what the files containing the
code for the coursework provide and how they can be executed.  A more precise
description and step by step explanation on how the code can be run to
replicate the coursework results can be found in Appendix B: Instructions for
using the code.

The bulk of the coursework uses the Matlab Neural Network Toolbox to run the
necessary neural networks.  Where the use of the toolbox was not necessary
scripts are written in R.  R is the GNU implementation and extension of the S
statistical language conceptualised at the AT&T labs (R-project, 2013).  For
more information about obtaining a copy of the R language and using it please
read Appendix E: Resources on R and GNU Octave.

Each part of the procedure described in Section 1: Methods used have its own
division of code.  Respectively with the section 1: you can find the data
analysis for normalisation and the normalisation itself in the directory
entitled normalisation;  the creation of the 7th frame for the extra network
is done in the etc directory;  the nnetworks directory contains the automated
procedure for running the neural networks using the NN Toolbox;  and the
statistics directory contains the code to generate the final results presented
in the tables of Section 2: Findings.  The directory third_party contains the
original and normalized data files provided for the coursework.  Finally, the
directory results contains the measures over the neural networks ran.  Also,
the directory report contains the files used to create this document.

To run the R scripts (files terminating in .R) you will need the Rscript
command line application, provided with a default installation of the R
language.  For example, to run the file norm.R you will execute from the
command line the following command:

Rscript norm.R

The Matlab files (terminating in .m) are compatible with GNU Octave, although
GNU Octave do not provide the Neural Network Toolbox and will fail to run the
scripts that depend on this toolbox.  To run these files you can either point
Matlab to the directory containing the file and run it inside Matlab, or run
it from the command line by executing "matlab -r".  For example, to run the
file data_analysis.m you can run:

matlab -r data_analysis

The same can be done using GNU Octave, for the same example you would run:

octave data_analysis.m

For more information on GNU Octave please refer to Appendix E: Resources on R
and GNU Octave.

